tree: SharedTree Philosophy (#17201)
microsoft/FluidFramework: experimental/dds/tree2/docs/Shared Tree Philosophy.md

# Shared Tree

The goal of the shared tree project is empower developers to create and maintain better collaborative experiences.

To best achieve this goal we plan to deliver a set of libraries that enable developers unfamiliar with the challenges specific to collaborative applications to:

-   Adopt Shared Tree without concern for having to migrate to another solution due to hitting limitations.

    This means that if a developer wants to make a change that interacts with collaboration, the fact that their application is powered by shared tree will not be a limiting factor on what can be achieved.
    This includes compatibility between different application or version of an applications, scalability, availability, merge quality etc.
    More concretely, if faced with a new application collaboration requirement, it should be practical to either build it on top of shared tree or extend shared tree to support it.
    Doing this should not require major reworking of either the application or shared tree implementations, not require extending it in a way that the upstream shared tree would not be willing to maintain.

> -   Productively create and maintain collaborative experiences.

Reviewer: I think this should be the first point, since this is the actual problem Shared Tree is solving. The point about migration could be moved after the pitfalls bullet, since it's an example of a specific pitfall.

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: Done

>     Doing this "productively" means ensuring that a developer new to collaboration will be directed into using patterns that work well for collaborative applications,

Reviewer 2: You should consider moving the emphasis on guiding the developer into patterns that work well with collab into the title, as it is very important.

Reviewer 2: Although, given the bullet point below this "Avoid common...", I'm wondering if they should be merged.

Author: I'm going to leave this as is for now. Its kind hard to sperate pitfalls avoidances and productivity, but I think they are things we want to address somewhat seperatly (ex: make sure there are good patterns which are productive is different from avoiding bad patterns that produce bad UX, bugs or are simply error prone or hard to maintain)

    and ensuring that useful supporting libraries are in place to make this a good experience.

-   Avoid common pitfalls of collaborative software.

    Collaboration often introduces subtle requirements, especially around compatibility, updates, offline use, error cases, persistance and concurrency.

>     Picking the right design patterns (above) as well has explicitly drawing attention to particular details in the API design, documentation and examples all need to work together to holistically guide developers into creating experiences that collaborate correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Picking the right design patterns (above) as well as explicitly drawing attention to particular details in the API design, documentation and examples all need to work together to holistically guide developers into creating experiences that collaborate correctly.
```

    Additionally, the resulting experiences need to be maintainable, including easy authoring of new features and reviewing of changes for possible collaboration issues.
    For code authors, it should be easy to find the right way to do something, and know it will be robust.

>     For code reviews, it should be obvious in review, only looking at the part of the code change, if it might introduce a collaboration related issue (such as unexpected merge behavior, issues collaborating with previous or future versions of the app, inability to open old document etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For code reviews, it should be obvious in review, only looking at the changed code, if it might introduce a collaboration related issue (such as unexpected merge behavior, issues collaborating with previous or future versions of the app, inability to open old document, etc.).
```

    This needs to be true, even for a novice users of shared tree without experience writing collaborative experiences.

    One way this is achieved is to ensure work and requirements specific to collaboration support will be easy to discover when relevant and easy learn about and handle when needed.

>     For example, if adding a new editing operation, it should be obvious how to ensure a the required application invariants hold—even across merges—, and what the implications are for deployment and cross version collaboration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For example, if adding a new editing operation, it should be obvious how to ensure the required application invariants hold—even across merges—, and what the implications are for deployment and cross version collaboration.
```

> -   Generalizes investments into improved user experiences across many different application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Generalize investments into improved user experiences across many different application.
```

    As much as possible, shared tree should serve as a framework for sharing generalized collaborative logic, and a good default library of such logic.
    For example merge resolution strategies, compatibility adapters, debug tools, common schema etc, can be generalized for easy use by all users of Shared Tree.

>     Users of shared tree can start by authoring their own specialized version of any of these (if needed), and then consider generalizing them as either independent libraries or contributing upstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Users of shared tree can start by authoring their own specialized version of any of these (if needed), and then consider generalizing them as either independent libraries or upstream contributions.
```

Another way to describe these goals is that Shared Tree needs to be able to be **adopted with confidence**.

> Once adopted, it must be **easily learnable** and **productive** for developers new to collaborative application while being **flexible** in what it supports and produce **robust** and **high quality** collaborative experiences.

Reviewer 2: Regarding "easily learnable", I think that there's an argument (@nmsimons) to be made that this should be a top-level bullet point. Adoptability/ease of use is as important as our ability to handle collab IMO.

Author: Done. Factoring this out simplified a few places: good idea.

In addition to these overall goals, Shared Tree also needs to provide an MVP early in the development and internally be **maintainable** and **extensible**.
This allows it to deliver value early, but also continue to be developed to reduce the development effort required of application authors to improve the experience it enables for end users.
These internal requirements mostly follow from the above flexibility requirement, but are worth the extra emphasis.

# Implications of these Goals

> Commonly desired collaboration features easy for applications to support, but when supporting them requires extra work, can be explicitly oped out of or differed to a future version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commonly desired collaboration features should be easy for applications to support, but when supporting them requires extra work, they can be explicitly opted out of or deferred to a future version.
```

> This include features like:

Reviewer 2: strongly agree with this entire list; I also think somewhere under "implications" there needs to be something about special attention paid to ease-of-use/learnability/adoptability.

-   cross version collaboration support to enable incremental rollout of updates.
-   compatibility between different applications, including when those applications evolve their schema.
-   fine grained and/or customized merge resolution.
-   support for offline use.
-   ensuring specific application data invariants hold.
-   scaling to large datasets.
-   services to accelerate some operations (like summarization, search etc).

> Shared Trees approach to doing all this while being extensible and maintainable relies in modularity and versioning is covered below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shared Tree's approach to doing all this while being extensible and maintainable relies on modularity and versioning, and is covered below.
```

# A Design For Extensibility and Compatibility with Versioning

Shared tree is a collaborative data-structure allowing cross version collaboration as well as support for loading all old formats.

> Thus imposes some very strict compatibility requirements which make changes to its implementation and functionality difficult.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This imposes some very strict compatibility requirements that can make changing its implementation and functionality difficult.
```

> # Shared Tree

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Shared Tree Design Philosophy
```

    Using the libraries should teach what is needed when its needed rather than requiring collaboration specific knowledge or experience as a prerequisite.
    The learning curve should be fast enough to be productive on day one, both for maintaining existing experiences or authoring new ones.

-   Adopt Shared Tree without concern for having to migrate to another solution due to hitting limitations.

    This means that if a developer wants to make a change that interacts with collaboration, the fact that their application is powered by shared tree will not be a limiting factor on what can be achieved.
    This includes compatibility between different application or version of an applications, scalability, availability, merge quality etc.
    More concretely, if faced with a new application collaboration requirement, it should be practical to either build it on top of shared tree or extend shared tree to support it.
    Doing this should not require major reworking of either the application or shared tree implementations, not require extending it in a way that the upstream shared tree would not be willing to maintain.

-   Avoid common pitfalls of collaborative software.

>     Collaboration often introduces subtle requirements, especially around compatibility, updates, offline use, error cases, persistance and concurrency.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Collaboration often introduces subtle requirements, especially around compatibility, updates, offline use, error cases, persistence and concurrency.
```

-   compatibility between different applications, including when those applications evolve their schema.
-   fine grained and/or customized merge resolution.
-   support for offline use.
-   ensuring specific application data invariants hold.
-   scaling to large datasets.
-   services to accelerate some operations (like summarization, search etc).

Shared Tree's approach to doing all this while being extensible and maintainable relies on modularity and versioning, and is covered below.

# A Design For Extensibility and Compatibility with Versioning

Shared tree is a collaborative data-structure allowing cross version collaboration as well as support for loading all old formats.
This imposes some very strict compatibility requirements that can make changing its implementation and functionality difficult.

This puts a large tension between maintainability and extensibility.
This leads to a design that is focused on optimizing for extensibility while minimizing the difficult of maintaining compatibility across these extensions.
The approach Shared Tree takes for this is separation of concerns and version-ability of components.

> Concepts are split into three catagories based on compatibility requirements (see [SchemaVersioning](packages/dds/SchemaVersioning.md) for details of why these exist and what is in each):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Concepts are split into three categories based on compatibility requirements (see [SchemaVersioning](packages/dds/SchemaVersioning.md) for details of why these exist and what is in each):
```

1. Critical for consistent behavior and thus must have compatibility forever to support old document and cross version collaboration.
2. Only impacts the current instance of the application, and can be changed without maintaining identical behavior in previously supported cases.

> The Shared Tree design minimizes the amount of stuff (code, formats, data, etc) in the first category, as well as to keep the items in the first category as simple and independent as practical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Shared Tree design minimizes the amount of stuff (code, formats, data, etc) in the first category and attempts to keep items in the first category as simple and independent as practical.
```

> For example, the merge resolution logic for sequences is defined as a single component, and if it needs changes that are incompatible (for example an improvement,ent to merge resolution), its possible to simply author a new version of this logic, and select between both at runtime based on either protocol version or schema.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the merge resolution logic for sequences is defined as a single component, and if it needs changes that are incompatible (for example an improvement to merge resolution), its possible to simply author a new version of this logic, and select between both at runtime based on either protocol version or schema.
```

Additionally the Shared Tree architecture organizes these components such that if needed they can be replaced incrementally.
For example, the tree reading and editing API is build on-top of cursors.
A different version of this API can be authored, tested and adopted side by side with the old one with minimum difficulty.
If the underlying tree storage (`forest`) changes, the tree API components (`editable-tree`) will not be impacted.
Similarly if the cursor API needed to change, forest could add support for the new one (without dropping the old one), then users could migrate incrementally.
This kind concurrent multi-version support is extra important for cases which fall into category one above (impact data compatibility not just API compatibility).
For example shared tree can introduce a new version of editing primitives and/or merge semantics for a field kind (for example sequence, see below),
which applications can opt into in their schema in a compatible way.

> Shared Tree is also designed to ensure applications using it can also adopt this same compatibility approach if needed while minimizing the frequency its required as well as the difficulty of doing it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Shared Tree is also designed to ensure applications using it can also adopt this same compatibility approach while minimizing the frequency and difficulty of doing so.
```

> This has the largest impact around application schema evolution (changing the schema the application uses to view and edit documents).

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this sentence is trying to convey. What has that large impact, and what is the result?

Author: I have rephrased this to be more specific/explicit.

## Bipartite Tree and Field Kinds

When users edit documents, those high level semantic operations need to be encoded in a way that supports merges.
Additionally this encoding needs to be deterministically applied in all clients, even if they are using different version of Shared Tree.

> This needs to be done such that when desired, applications can ensure invariants hold.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This needs to be done such that applications can ensure invariants hold in their data model.
```

> This means the editing and merge logic must be kept identical for compatibility, and changes to it instead have to be strictly new cases being supported:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means the editing and merge logic must be kept identical for compatibility, and changes to them instead must only add support for new cases.
```

> for example new edit operations can be added or new configuration flags added to existing ones can be added, but how a particular merge gets resolved can not be changed without introducing a compatibility issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, new edit operations can be added or new configuration flags added to existing ones, but how a particular merge gets resolved cannot be changed without introducing a compatibility issue.
```

This can get complicated, so to keep it manageable, this problem was subdivided in a few different ways.

The data-model for Shared Tree was selected to assist with subdividing this problem.

> The selected data-model consists of many small structures where collaborative edits interact—fields—, and nodes which connect them into a hierarchy and assigns types to each of the fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The selected data-model consists of many small structures where collaborative edits interact via fields and nodes which connect them into a hierarchy and assigns types to each of the fields.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The selected data-model consists of many small structures named "fields" where collaborative edits interact, and "nodes" which connect them into a hierarchy and assigns types to each of the fields.
```

The nodes have schema which define the schema for their fields.

> There are a few [kinds](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kind_(type_theory)>) of nodes configure their fields differently, for example like structs (with a fixed set of mixed field types) or maps (with an extensible set of matching field types).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are a few [kinds](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kind_(type_theory)>) of nodes that configure their fields differently, for example structs (with a fixed set of mixed field types) or maps (with an extensible set of matching field types).
```

There are also a few kinds of fields which provide different collaborative data-structures (like `sequence`, or `optional`), each of which hold nodes.

All of the editing is done in the fields via the `field kind`.
This allows the editing logic, both API and merge policy, to be packaged together into minimal versionable units ( `field kinds`).

> Since the schema explicitly selects what field kinds to use, updating of them is opt in, and can be coordinated with deployment schedules to achieve the required cross version collaboration requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the schema explicitly selects what field kinds to use, updating them is opt-in, and can be coordinated with deployment schedules to achieve the required cross version collaboration requirements.
```

> This also leverages all the same collaboration as the rest od schema evolution, making adopting alternative field kinds no different from updating other aspects of the application's schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This also leverages all the same collaboration as the rest of schema evolution, making adopting alternative field kinds no different from updating other aspects of the application's schema.
```

Reviewer 2: I'll also note that you reference "all the same collaboration as the rest of schema evolution" but you haven't really defined schema evolution.

> This results in a tree where the overall shape is controlled by the application via its tree schema (for the nodes), but its made of alternating layers of fields provide all the complex logic, neatly separating the concerns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This results in a tree where the overall shape is controlled by the application via its tree schema (for the nodes) and the alternating layers of fields provide all the complex logic, neatly separating the concerns.
```

This can also be thought of as a tree of entities alternating between fields and nodes.
As these two kinds of entities alternate and thus never touch, this resembles a [Bipartite Graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bipartite_graph), and can be called a Bipartite Tree.

> # Constraints and Sub-Trees

Reviewer 2: It was clear to me why you included the section above this one in this document (and the section preceding it even introduced it), but it would useful to emphasize which parts of the introduction (avoiding pitfalls?) this ties into.

Author: I have rewritten this whole section, and tried to make that more clear.

When users edit documents, those high level semantic operations need to be encoded in a way that supports merges.

> Applications need to be able to easily ensure the invariants they require will be maintained across merged, and (possible with some effort) high fidelity merge resolution should be achievable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Applications need to be able to easily ensure the invariants they require will be maintained across merges.
```

Reviewer 2: Not clear if the second part of the sentence adds anything (and maybe contradicts the first part?)

Author: It add something very important: We need to define success such that all changes are conflicted and rejected is considered bad and we preserve as much of edits as possible. Yes, this is in direct opposition to maintaining invariants, and balancing this in a way that the app is happy with is our job.

Author: I have clarified this in the rewriting of this section

Ideally the built in merge resolution will be sufficient to ensure the application invariants hold (see "Field Kinds" below), however this won't always be the case.

> Thus an additional tool is required: "Constraints".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To cover those instances, an additional tool is required: "Constraints".
```

> Constraints are used to specify what concurrent edits could cause an unacceptable merge result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Constraints are used to specify which concurrent edits could cause an unacceptable merge result.
```

This can get complicated, so to keep it manageable, this problem was subdivided in a few different ways.

The data-model for Shared Tree was selected to assist with subdividing this problem.
The selected data-model consists of many small structures where collaborative edits interact—fields—, and nodes which connect them into a hierarchy and assigns types to each of the fields.

The nodes have schema which define the schema for their fields.
There are a few [kinds](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kind_(type_theory)>) of nodes that configure their fields differently, for example structs (with a fixed set of mixed field types) or maps (with an extensible set of matching field types).

There are also a few kinds of fields which provide different collaborative data-structures (like `sequence`, or `optional`), each of which hold nodes.

All of the editing is done in the fields via the `field kind`.
This allows the editing logic, both API and merge policy, to be packaged together into minimal versionable units ( `field kinds`).

> Since the schema explicitly selects what field kinds to use, updating them is opt-in, and can be coordinated with deployment schedules to achieve the required cross version collaboration requirements.

Author: Yes. Choosing otherwise is document corruption since edits as interpreted by field kinds are stored in documents for unbounded time.

This also leverages all the same collaboration as the rest of schema evolution, making adopting alternative field kinds no different from updating other aspects of the application's schema.

> This results in a tree where the overall shape is controlled by the application via its tree schema (for the nodes) and the alternating layers of fields provide all the complex logic, neatly separating the concerns.

Reviewer 4: This is the first time I see this explanation of nodes vs fields. I think it needs more prominence as we create the final versions of the docs.

This can also be thought of as a tree of entities alternating between fields and nodes.
As these two kinds of entities alternate and thus never touch, this resembles a [Bipartite Graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bipartite_graph), and can be called a Bipartite Tree.

# Constraints and Sub-Trees

When users edit documents, those high level semantic operations need to be encoded in a way that supports merges.
Applications need to be able to easily ensure the invariants they require will be maintained across merged, and (possible with some effort) high fidelity merge resolution should be achievable.

While the built in merge resolution will often be sufficient to ensure the application invariants hold (see "Field Kinds" above), this won't always be the case.
To cover those instances, an additional tool is required: "Constraints".
Constraints are used to specify which concurrent edits could cause an unacceptable merge result.

> The constraints API (status: its not finished yet) allows defining a constraint that is sufficiently conservative, meaning that it will detect all concurrent edits that could possible be an issue, but might include some that would be fine.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The constraints API (status: it's not finished yet) allows defining a constraint that is sufficiently conservative, meaning that it will detect all concurrent edits that could possibly be an issue, but might include some that would be fine.
```

For example for many transactions, edits to unrelated subtrees are safe, so only constraining the smallest impacted subtree makes sense.
Furthermore, for most simple transactions, like operations impacting a single field, its likely the built in merge resolution and automatic field level constraints will be sufficient (for example setting an optional value could pick last write wins semantics, and not need any additional constraints, or might use a first write wins approach, and automatically get a constraint that the field hasn't changed).

One of the reasons SharedTree is a tree (not a graph or something else) is forcing clear ownership and scoping based on the tree structure enables effective and intuitive constraints.

Logically different subtrees are independent of each-other, and when operations do span them, both sides or a common parent can be constrained as needed.

Users of Shared Tree are encouraged to factor their applications in this tree structured pattern as well, allowing subtrees to be passed into the relevant application components.

> This helps enable reuse of application components withing and across shared tree applications, as well as best enables optimizations like those mentioned in "Efficient Data Storage" to be effective and encapsulated.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This helps enable reuse of application components within and across shared tree applications, as well as best enables optimizations like those mentioned in "Efficient Data Storage" to be effective and encapsulated.
```

Some areas of the SharedTree design that currently do not deliver ideal subtree isolation are:

-   Schema: A given schema identifier has the same meaning in the entire tree. This means that currently embedding two different versions of a sub-tree application in different places with mismatched schema versions might not work depending on how it versions its schema. Designs to address this, and some related issues (like generically parameterized collections) are referred to as "contextual schema" and could be implemented in future version of SharedTree.
-   Loading and Summarization: Currently all subtrees are downloaded and summarized together.
    Designs for "partial checkouts" are planned to address this for data loading, but there isn't a plan do address this for summarization.
-   Op transmitting and processing: All clients will receive and process all ops in the shared tree.

# Stored and View Schema

Applications need to make assumptions about the data they are working with.

> For simple in memory cases, this is generally managed with types.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For simple in-memory cases, this is generally managed with types.
```

> The code in the application uses those types to enable readers of the code (including other developers and compilers) reason about and validate the logic in the application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The code in the application uses those types to enable readers of the code (including other developers and compilers) to reason about and validate the logic in the application.
```

> Shared Tree provides this same experience: the application code gets to use types to reason about the document content its working with, however it also has to deal with the fact that the document content might come from a different application or a different version of the same application (newer, older or even a divergent fork).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Shared Tree provides this same experience: the application code gets to use types to reason about the document content it's working with, however it also has to deal with the fact that the document content might come from a different application or a different version of the same application (newer, older or even a divergent fork).
```

> To ensure content from a document is not misinterpreted, the document carries with it the "stored schema", which defines the structure and editing behaviors of the content within ghr document.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To ensure content from a document is not misinterpreted, the document carries with it the "stored schema", which defines the structure and editing behaviors of the content within the document.
```

This can be checked against the "view schema" which defines the types the application is programmed against.
If they match, the application can safely work on the document as is.
If they do not match, the application needs to take some corrective action.
The set of possible corrective actions generally includes raising a compatibility error, updating or adapting the document to a supported format.
In the general case these compatibility fixes can be done in a composable subtree local way, and form a general approach for handling schema evolution.
This approach is designed to enable separating the portion of the application that deals with compatibility, keeping the main logic of the app as clean as possible, as suggested in [SchemaVersioning](packages/dds/SchemaVersioning.md).

> Importantly, the View Schema, allow the application to have strong types for the document content, which helps make it clear which invariants Shared Tree guarantees (mainly that the document stays in schema) and which ones the application must take action to maintain (nearly everything else).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Importantly, the View Schema allows the application to have strong types for the document content, which helps make it clear which invariants Shared Tree guarantees (mainly that the document stays in schema) and which ones the application must take action to maintain (nearly everything else).
```

Additionally the strong types from the view schema should help improve readability and maintainability of Shared Tree powered collaborative experiences,

> and the checking of them against view schema guards against may data corruption sceneries that are common in collaborative editing scenarios.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
and the checking of them against view schema guards against may data corruption scenarios that are common in collaborative editing scenarios.
```

# Efficient Data Storage

This extension point is only intended for use within the Shared Tree implementation, and will start with a small set of formats which should work quite well for most applications.

Without careful design performance could become a major limitation of Shared Tree.
A simple general purpose tree implementation, not optimized for any particular usage patterns, will be enough for many applications.
However, shared tree needs to have a way to add optimizations for specific cases when they are needed.
This is key to ensuring users of shared tree can leverage shared tree for handling their collaboration, even for fine grained operations at the leaves where the node count can be very high relative to the data size, and per node overhead can become prohibitive.

To tackle this problem in a way that follows the compatibility and extensibility approach of separation of concerns and versioned components, Chunked Forest was created.

> The goal is to ensure it is possible to provide high performance specialized tree representations that can handle specific use cases with performance thats not inhibited by being part of Shared Tree.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The goal is to ensure it is possible to provide high performance specialized tree representations that can handle specific use cases with performance that's not inhibited by being part of Shared Tree.
```

Secondary to this is ensuring that the effort required to do this is minimized.

> This means both that the baseline performance should be good enough in most cases, and the specialized cases should as general as possible while still offering the required performance wins to reduce how many specializations are needed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This means both that the baseline performance should be good enough in most cases, and the specialized cases should be as general as possible while still offering the required performance wins to reduce how many specializations are needed.
```

This ensures that all logic can be compared against the simple non specialized reference implementation (for example for testing the optimizations), and that it's ok if uncommon edge cases cause the specialized formats to not be used and fall back to more generic ones.

Accomplishing this goal requires specialized tree data formats or APIs at a few levels:

1. In serialized data, including ops and summaries.

    In the most general case this includes binary data which can be stored in Fluid's blob storage, so this layer is called "blobs".
    This allows different parts of the tree to use different blob formats.

2. In the in memory tree representation (Forest).

    This is handled by Chunked Forest, which implements the Forest abstraction by delegating to tree content which implements a Chunk abstraction.
    This allows different parts of the forest to use different chunk formats.
    Accessing the content of a Forest is done through Cursors.
    Specialized chunked implementations can declare support for fast path APIs via symbols to allow their user to query for and use them.

> To enable efficient encoding and decoding between these formats, both are owned by chunked forest (allowing zero copy optimizations for data arrays between the two), and ref-counting is used on chunks so trees can be lazily closed, and modified in place when only referenced once.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To enable efficient encoding and decoding between these formats, both are owned by chunked forest (allowing zero copy optimizations for data arrays between the two), and ref-counting is used on chunks so trees can be lazily cloned, and modified in place when only referenced once.
```
